---
layout: page
title: "Geometric Algebra Study Group"
description: "Note compilation for the study group lectures on geometric algebra."
img: 
date: 2023-12-05
category: Notes
---

This is a semester experimental study group on "Geometric (Clifford) Algebra."

Inspired by the beauty of conformal geometric algebra in solving inverse kinematics problem as well as its interpretation and easy manipulation, my friend [Wei-Hsuan Cheng](https://wei-hsuan-cheng.github.io/) (who specializes in CGA) and I decided to prepare a series of lecture talks on the fundamentals of geometric algebra. The talks ends in the culmination of the application of conformal geometric algebra in robotics.

# Video list
The videos list can be found [here](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLrzEZxtFxU-nV-7E35vuxrDJfCagX123M).

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/videoseries?si=gZsmPs0fBphLE9Gr&amp;list=PLrzEZxtFxU-nV-7E35vuxrDJfCagX123M" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The topics include:
- 09/12: An introduction to the history of geometric algebra and its application in engineering mathematics.
- 09/19: Vector space, exterior algebra, the geometric product, and the geometric algebra of Euclidean space. The mirroring and rotation action in geometric algebra.
- 09/26: Calculation of rotors. Algebra of non-Euclidean signatures. Duality.
- 10/03: Duality and regression product. Computation of dot and wedge product of arbitrary multivectors. Reciprocity, duality, and dual space. Group theory.
- 10/31: Plane-based (projective) geometric algebra.
- 11/07: The join operation in PGA. Euclidean dynamics in PGA.
- 11/14: Computation examples in PGA -- the geometry and the dynamics. Cartan-Dieudonné theorem. Special relativity.
- 11/21: Spacetime algebra, the Faraday bivector, and the Lorentz transformation of electro-magnetic fields.
- 11/28: Conformal geometric algebra (CGA), its geometric elements, and the inner product / outer product null space representation.
- 12/05: Conformal transformations. CGA and the inverse kinematics of robotics.

# Notes (unfinished)
The (unfinished) notes can be downloaded [here](/assets/pdf/projects/2023_GA_study_group.pdf).
<embed src="/assets/pdf/projects/2023_GA_study_group.pdf" type="application/pdf" width="100%" height="600px" />