---
layout: page
title: "Inverse Nonlinear Fourier Transform: Applications in Quantum Signal Processing"
description: "This report elucidates the application of nonlinear Fourier transform over SU(2) matrices on algorithm design for quantum signal processing. A compilation of algorithmic advancements such as the Riemann--Hilbert--Weiss algorithm are discussed."
img: 
date: 2025-06-13
category: School Projects
---

> This is a final project for the course \"Special Topics in Quantum Information Science\" given in the spring of 2025 by Prof. [Shih-Han Hung](https://hungshihhan.github.io/).

# Abstract
 Quantum signal processing is a powerful framework encompassing many quantum algorithms, enabling polynomial transformations of the singular values of matrix block-encodings. Finding the phase factors in QSP protocols is a critical step in implementing these transformations. Traditional phase finding methods, such as the layer-stripping method, while intuitive, face challenges with numerical instability. In recent years, the introduction of the relationship between nonlinear Fourier transform and quantum signal processing has provided new perspectives and tools to address this task. This paper reviews the recent development of quantum signal processing phase-finding methods based on nonlinear Fourier transform, including the Riemann–Hilbert–Weiss algorithm, the Half-Cholesky method, and the state-of-the-art inverse nonlinear fast Fourier transform. The mathematical principles, computational complexities, and numerical stability of these algorithms are detailed, with particular emphasis on the crucial role of the outerness condition of the complementary polynomial //(a^∗(z)//) in ensuring stability. Finally, this paper summarizes current research progress and looks ahead to potential future research directions, aiming to promote the broader application of the nonlinear Fourier transform perspective in the field of quantum signal processing and quantum computing.

# Teammate
- Wen Perng (B10901042)
- Po-chieh Liu (B10901017)

# Slides
Download the slides for the talk [here](/assets/slides/projects/2025_QSP_NFT_slides.pdf).

<embed src="/assets/slides/projects/2025_QSP_NFT_slides.pdf" type="application/pdf" width="100%" height="600px" />


# Project Report
Download the final report [here](/assets/pdf/projects/2025_QSP_NFT.pdf).

<embed src="/assets/pdf/projects/2025_QSP_NFT.pdf" type="application/pdf" width="100%" height="600px" />

