---
layout: post
title: The Magnitude Torus of Fourier Phase Retrieval
date: 2026-07-07
description: "The thought process behind our work and how it came to be."
tags: math code
categories: publications
permalink: /publication/2026-ICIP
---

The work "Manifold Optimization on the Magnitude Torus for Fourier Phase Retrieval" is accepted to [ICIP 2026](https://2026.ieeeicip.org/). This blog post is a record of how we discovered this topic, what our initial motivation is, and what approaches we have taken that led to the finalized conference version.

## Motivation
Working under Prof. Homer H. Chen on optical systems, it is quite a far stretch for us to suddenly stumble upon the problem of Fourier phase retrieval. This part goes over exactly the backstory.

Furthermore, we also give a brief description of our motivation to analyze the Fourier phase retrieval problem from a geometric point of view.

### Optical interpolation


### Projected gradient descent



## The Magnitude Torus

### Local dynamical point of view

### Global

### Traversing the torus




## Manifold Optimization
In hindsight, the two algorithms we have developed are quite obvious---it is natural that such algorithms can lead the iterations closer to the local optima. Yet, coming up with them took us on quite a convoluted thought process.

### TorusGD
The idea of `TorusGD` is simple, perform gradient descent in the torus coordinates, this idea is an immediate consequence of the parameterization we obtained that allows us to traverse on the torus.

The problem lies in how we can numerically implement it.

The first task is to obtain the basis $$\{\boldsymbol{u}_k, \boldsymbol{v}_k\}_{k \in \mathcal{N}_{p} \cup \mathcal{N}_{c}}$$, i.e., how do we obtain the row indices $$\mathcal{N}_{p}$$ and $$\mathcal{N}_{c}$$ that define unique Fourier constraints on the set of possible signals?

### dualPGD
The algorithm predates the name `dualPGD`. It is only after the algorithm was formulated did we realize that it was in fact dual to the PGD algorithm.