---
title: "Matrix Differentiation"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2023-11-02-talk
venue: "Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University"
date: 2023-11-02
location: "Taipei, Taiwan"
excerpt: "What is matrix differentiation? How do we make sense of the notation \\(\frac{\mathrm{d} f}{\mathrm{d} A}\\), where \\(f\\) is a scalar function of a matrix \\(A\\)? This talk answers just that.
"
---

> What is matrix differentiation? How do we make sense of the notation \\(\frac{\mathrm{d} f}{\mathrm{d} A}\\), where \\(f\\) is a scalar function of a matrix \\(A\\)? This talk answers just that.

<iframe width="560" height="315" 
        src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/YRVq5iREDJo?si=bZrsyBzveZg1lvXG" 
        frameborder="0" 
        allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" 
        allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

# About the Talk

Starting from the notion of Fréchet derivative, we motivate treating the differential as a linear operator between vector spaces. This allows us to easily derive the first and second derivative of a scalar function on vectors (the gradient \\(\nabla f\\) and Hessian \\(\nabla\nabla^{\mathsf{T}}f\\)). We further demonstrate what differentiation of a scalar function by a matrix is.

Along the way, the infamous notational jargon of "numerator layout" and "denominator layout" of matrix differentiation is also clarified.

Lastly, we go over some examples and applications of matrix differentiation: this includes the derivative of an inverse matrix, the linear least mean square estimator, the derivative of eigenvalues, and etc.

# Slides

<embed src="/files/slides/talks/Matrix%20Differentiation%202023%20[written].pdf" type="application/pdf" width="100%" height="600px" />

Download the [slides](/files/slides/talks/Matrix%20Differentiation%202023%20[written].pdf).

More can be found [here](https://github.com/WenPerng/EESAAD_slides).

---
**About NTUEE SAAD Theoretical Talks**

The student academic association department (SAAD), NTUEE, is a student-run association under the electrical engineering department of National Taiwan University. It organizes events and courses such as this theoretical talk to bachelor students in the department.

The theoretical talks target at students with an interest in the more theoretical and mathematical aspects of engineering.